docs/desktop-applications/lifesim/users-guide/v1.0/01-preface.mdx, before:

---
title: "Preface"
---

import NavContainer from "@site/src/components/NavContainer";
import VersionSelector from "@site/src/components/VersionSelector";
import Link from "@docusaurus/Link";
import addBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import CitationFootnote from "@site/src/components/CitationFootnote";

<NavContainer 
  link="/desktop-applications/lifesim"
  linkTitle="LifeSim"
  document="desktop-applications/lifesim/users-guide"
></NavContainer>

# Preface

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Life Loss Estimation software (LifeSim) is a spatially-distributed dynamic simulation modeling system for
estimating potential life loss and direct economic damages from natural and dam and levee failure floods.  The main purpose of the LifeSim software is
 to help USACE study teams better understand the consequences of a flood event. Although flooding can lead to many types of severe consequences, the
primary objective of the USACE Dam and Levee Safety program is to manage risk to the public who rely on those structures to keep them reasonably safe from
 flooding.

<CitationFootnote />

Commit message:

- Revised Validation Study tables colWidth's to be by %'s instead of character length. - Began content edits of LifeSim User's Guide .mdx's

docs/desktop-applications/lifesim/users-guide/v1.0/01-preface.mdx, after:

---
title: "Preface"
---

import NavContainer from "@site/src/components/NavContainer";
import VersionSelector from "@site/src/components/VersionSelector";
import Link from "@docusaurus/Link";
import addBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import CitationFootnote from "@site/src/components/CitationFootnote";

<NavContainer 
  link="/desktop-applications/lifesim"
  linkTitle="LifeSim"
  document="desktop-applications/lifesim/users-guide"
></NavContainer>

# Preface

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Life Loss Estimation software (LifeSim) is a spatially-distributed dynamic simulation modeling system for
estimating potential life loss and direct economic damages from natural and dam and levee failure floods. The main purpose of the LifeSim software is
to help studies and their teams better understand the consequences of a flood event. Although flooding can lead to many types of severe consequences, the
primary objective of the USACE Dam and Levee Safety program is to manage risk to the public who rely on those structures to keep them reasonably safe from
flooding.

The purpose of the User's Guide is to provide users with information on getting started with the software, what inputs are needed and how to import and 
modify them, and how to view and analyze results.

<CitationFootnote />
