docs/toolbox-technical-manuals/internal-erosion-suite/pipe-service-life/v1.0/02-terms-and-conditions-for-use.mdx, before:

---
title: "Terms and Conditions for Use"
---

import NavContainer from "@site/src/components/NavContainer";
import VersionSelector from "@site/src/components/VersionSelector";
import Link from "@docusaurus/Link";
import addBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import CitationFootnote from "@site/src/components/CitationFootnote";

<NavContainer 
  link="/toolbox-technical-manuals/internal-erosion-suite/pipe-service-life"
  linkTitle="Internal Erosion Suite"
  document="toolbox-technical-manuals/internal-erosion-suite/pipe-service-life"
></NavContainer>

# Terms and Conditions for Use

By using Institute for Water Resources (IWR) software, users voluntarily accept the following terms and conditions. Users that do not agree to these
terms and conditions should uninstall the IWR software and return any program materials to IWR and its technical centers. If users downloaded the
software and do not have disk media, delete all copies and cease using the software.

## Terms and Conditions for Use of Institute for Water Resources Software

The United States Government, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Institute for Water Resources (“IWR”), and IWR’s technical centers including the Risk
Management Center (“RMC”) and Hydrologic Engineering Center (“HEC”) grant to the user the rights to install “IWR Software” (either from a disk copy
obtained from IWR and IWR’s technical centers, a distributor or another user or by downloading it from a network) and to use, copy and/or distribute
copies of the IWR Software to other users, subject to the following Terms and Conditions of Use:

- All copies of the IWR Software received or reproduced by or for user pursuant to the authority of this Terms and Conditions of Use will be and
remain the property of IWR.

- User may reproduce and distribute the IWR Software provided that the recipient agrees to the Terms and Conditions for Use noted herein.

- IWR and IWR’s technical centers are solely responsible for the content of the IWR Software. The IWR Software may not be modified, abridged,
decompiled, disassembled, unobfuscated or reverse engineered. The user is solely responsible for the content, interactions, and effects of any and all
 amendments, if present, whether they be extension modules, language resource bundles, scripts, or any other amendment.

- The name of the IWR Software must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from the IWR Software. Products derived from the IWR Software
may not be called the IWR Software nor may any part of the IWR Software name appear within the name of derived products.

- No part of this Terms and Conditions for Use may be modified, deleted, or obliterated from the IWR Software.

- No part of the IWR Software may be exported or re-exported in contravention of U.S. export laws or regulations.

## Waiver of Warranty

THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS PROVIDE THE IWR
SOFTWARE “AS IS,” WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY OR CONDITION, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR STATUTORY, AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF TITLE,
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. Depending on state law, the foregoing disclaimer may not apply to you, and you
 may also have other legal rights that vary from state to state.

## Limitation of Liability

IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS,
BE LIABLE FOR LOST PROFITS OR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH USE OF THE IWR SOFTWARE REGARDLESS
 OF CAUSE, INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE. THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT’S LIABILITY, AND THE LIABILITY OF ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND
EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS, TO YOU OR ANY THIRD PARTIES IN ANY CIRCUMSTANCE IS LIMITED TO THE REPLACEMENT OF CERTIFIED COPIES
OF THE IWR SOFTWARE WITH IDENTIFIED ERRORS CORRECTED. Depending on state law, the above limitation or exclusion may not apply to you.

## Indemnity

As a voluntary user of the IWR Software you agree to indemnify and hold the United States Government, and its agencies, officials, representatives,
and employees, including its contractors and suppliers, harmless from any claim or demand, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, made by any third
party due to or arising out of your use of the IWR Software or breach of this Agreement or your violation of any law or the rights of a third party.

<CitationFootnote />

Commit message:

Miscellaneous updates and reviews.
-Updated the header navigation links to include the RFA User's Guide.
-Updated incorrect NavContainer links to build and deploy website for checking
-Reviewed and revised Overtopping Toolbox User Notes and Site Classification Technical Manual

docs/toolbox-technical-manuals/internal-erosion-suite/pipe-service-life/v1.0/02-terms-and-conditions-for-use.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Terms and Conditions for Use'
---

import Link from '@docusaurus/Link';
import addBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';
import CitationFootnote from '@site/src/components/CitationFootnote';
import NavContainer from '@site/src/components/NavContainer';
import VersionSelector from '@site/src/components/VersionSelector';

<NavContainer
  link="/toolboxes/internal-erosion-suite"
  linkTitle="Internal Erosion Suite"
  document="toolbox-technical-manuals/internal-erosion-suite/pipe-service-life"
></NavContainer>

# Terms and Conditions for Use

By using Institute for Water Resources (IWR) software, users voluntarily accept the following terms and conditions. Users that do not agree to these
terms and conditions should uninstall the IWR software and return any program materials to IWR and its technical centers. If users downloaded the
software and do not have disk media, delete all copies and cease using the software.

## Terms and Conditions for Use of Institute for Water Resources Software

The United States Government, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Institute for Water Resources (“IWR”), and IWR’s technical centers including the Risk
Management Center (“RMC”) and Hydrologic Engineering Center (“HEC”) grant to the user the rights to install “IWR Software” (either from a disk copy
obtained from IWR and IWR’s technical centers, a distributor or another user or by downloading it from a network) and to use, copy and/or distribute
copies of the IWR Software to other users, subject to the following Terms and Conditions of Use:

- All copies of the IWR Software received or reproduced by or for user pursuant to the authority of this Terms and Conditions of Use will be and
  remain the property of IWR.

- User may reproduce and distribute the IWR Software provided that the recipient agrees to the Terms and Conditions for Use noted herein.

- IWR and IWR’s technical centers are solely responsible for the content of the IWR Software. The IWR Software may not be modified, abridged,
  decompiled, disassembled, unobfuscated or reverse engineered. The user is solely responsible for the content, interactions, and effects of any and all
  amendments, if present, whether they be extension modules, language resource bundles, scripts, or any other amendment.

- The name of the IWR Software must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from the IWR Software. Products derived from the IWR Software
  may not be called the IWR Software nor may any part of the IWR Software name appear within the name of derived products.

- No part of this Terms and Conditions for Use may be modified, deleted, or obliterated from the IWR Software.

- No part of the IWR Software may be exported or re-exported in contravention of U.S. export laws or regulations.

## Waiver of Warranty

THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS PROVIDE THE IWR
SOFTWARE “AS IS,” WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY OR CONDITION, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR STATUTORY, AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF TITLE,
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. Depending on state law, the foregoing disclaimer may not apply to you, and you
may also have other legal rights that vary from state to state.

## Limitation of Liability

IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS,
BE LIABLE FOR LOST PROFITS OR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH USE OF THE IWR SOFTWARE REGARDLESS
OF CAUSE, INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE. THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT’S LIABILITY, AND THE LIABILITY OF ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND
EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS, TO YOU OR ANY THIRD PARTIES IN ANY CIRCUMSTANCE IS LIMITED TO THE REPLACEMENT OF CERTIFIED COPIES
OF THE IWR SOFTWARE WITH IDENTIFIED ERRORS CORRECTED. Depending on state law, the above limitation or exclusion may not apply to you.

## Indemnity

As a voluntary user of the IWR Software you agree to indemnify and hold the United States Government, and its agencies, officials, representatives,
and employees, including its contractors and suppliers, harmless from any claim or demand, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, made by any third
party due to or arising out of your use of the IWR Software or breach of this Agreement or your violation of any law or the rights of a third party.

<CitationFootnote />
