docs/desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies/v1.0/05-katrina-east-bowl.mdx, before:

---
title: "Katrina - East Bowl"
---

import NavContainer from "@site/src/components/NavContainer";
import VersionSelector from "@site/src/components/VersionSelector";
import Link from "@docusaurus/Link";
import addBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import Citation from "@site/src/components/Citation";
import CitationFootnote from "@site/src/components/CitationFootnote";
import TableVertical from "@site/src/components/TableVertical";
import Figure from "@site/src/components/Figure";
import FigReference from "@site/src/components/FigureReference";
import FigureInline from "@site/src/components/FigureInline";
import TableReference from "@site/src/components/TableReference";
import Button from '@site/src/components/Button';

<NavContainer 
  link="/desktop-applications/lifesim"
  linkTitle="LifeSim"
  document="desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies"
></NavContainer>

# Hurricane Katrina - New Orleans East Bowl

New Orleans Levee System during Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans (East Bowl only), Louisiana, United States.

<Button href="https://www.rmc.usace.army.mil/Software/LifeSim/"><u>🡇</u> Download Model</Button>

## Overview

Hurricane Katrina (Katrina) formed as a tropical depression over the southeastern Bahamas on August 23, 2005. Katrina intensified after making landfall in southern Florida and became a 
Category 5 with peak winds of 175 mph; it was one of the most devastating natural disasters in United States history <Citation citationKey="NWS_Katrina_2005"/>.

Katrina had weakened to a Category 3 when it made landfall in New Orleans, Louisiana (NOLA) the morning of August 29, 2005. Life loss and property damage were exacerbated in 
NOLA due to the levee failures across the city; “The majority… of the flooding and half of the economic losses can be attributed to water flowing through breaches in floodwalls 
and levees” <Citation citationKey="USACE2006"/>. Primarily overtopping and subsequent erosion, 50 levees and floodwalls in NOLA failed during this catastrophic event. Approximately 80% of 
the city was flooded – causing over 1,400 NOLA fatalities and hundreds of thousands displaced <Citation citationKey="NYT2015"/>.

<Figure
  figKey="nola-flooded"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies/v1.0/figures/figure15.png"
  alt="NOLA blooded during Hurricane Katrina due to l-wall breach."
  caption={
    <>
      Flooded homes from Hurricane Katrina l-wall breach on London Avenue Outfall Canal in New Orleans. <Citation citationKey="USACE2006"/>
    </>
  }
/>

This validation data set focuses on NOLA East Bowl (highlighted red in <FigReference figKey="katrina-nola-map"/> below). According to <FigReference figKey="katrina-nola-map"/>, 
of the 27,986 housing units in New Orleans East, 79% was flooded, and 9.4% was over seven feet of inundation. NOLA East Bowl is comprised of sub-divisions, large business and manufacturing 
areas, and a wildlife refuge. It had an estimated population of 96,400 people and average income of $41,997 in August 2005 <Citation citationKey="NYT2015"/>. Of the NOLA East Bowl inhabitants, 9,620 were 
classified as exposed – meaning they were in the inundation area when the levees failed <Citation citationKey="Jonkman2009"/>.

Reported flood fatalities in NOLA East Bowl is 54 <Citation citationKey="Boyd2011"/>.

<Figure
  figKey="katrina-nola-map"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies/v1.0/figures/figure16.png"
  alt="NOLA inundation map August 31, 2005"
  caption={
    <>
      Extent and Depth of Flooding August 31, 2005 New Orleans Parish, LA. <Citation citationKey="NOAA2005"/>
    </>
  }
/>

## Data

The following provides a short description of the data sources used for validation.

### Hydraulics

A calibrated HEC-RAS hydraulic model was sourced from the 2006 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) *Performance Evaluation of the New Orleans and 
Southeast Louisiana Hurricane Protection System* Interagency Performance Evaluation Task Force (IPET) study.

*"An intense performance evaluation of the New Orleans and Southeast Louisiana Hurricane Protection System during Katrina. It was conducted by the [IPET], a distinguished group of 
government, academic, and private sector scientists and engineers who dedicated themselves to this task from shortly after Katrina 
struck through the start of the next hurricane season. Created by
the Chief of Engineers, [USACE] and peer reviewed literally on a weekly
basis by an equally distinguished external review panel of the American Society of Civil
Engineers, the group applied some of the most sophisticated capabilities available in civil
engineering to understand what happened during Katrina and why. Their purpose was not just
new knowledge, but application of that knowledge to the repair and reconstitution of protection
in New Orleans as well as improvement to engineering practice and policies."* <Citation citationKey="USACE2006"/>

### Structure Inventory

The structure inventory originated from 2015 parcel data, distributed 2004 population data, and manually-calibrated missing structures. Pre-Katrina aerial imagery was 
utilized for missing structures, and population inputs are reflective of the NOLA East Bowl pre-Katrina. The 2015 parcel dataset was obtained from the City of New Orleans 
and calibrated to the NOLA East Bowl breach event. 

Comprehensive study data available in *Loss of Life Estimation in Flood Risk Assessment, Theory and Applications*, authored by Jonkman, S. of Delft University, was used to 
validate human fatality rates and population at risk (PAR) <Citation citationKey="Jonkman2007"/>.

### Road Network

Traffic evacuations were not simulated. Therefore, a road network was not configured.

### Destinations

Traffic evacuations were not simulated. Therefore, destinations were not configured.

### Emergency Planning Zones
{/*Should the below section just read, "The emergency planning zone (EPZ) is set to one area that covers the entirety of NOLA East Bowl."*/}
Separate LifeSim validation studies and analyses were created for Katrina + NOLA, including a St. Bernard Bowl study, Main Bowl study, and this East Bowl study. Therefore, the 
**Emergency Planning Zone** (EPZ) is set to one area that covers the entirety of NOLA East Bowl. 
{/*Where were the First alert and PAI curves elicited from?*/}
Zero **Warning Issuance Delay** was implemented in the model due to the long warning time. Elicited **First Alert** and **Protective Action Initiation** (PAI) curves were created for NOLA 
East Bowl. The PAI curve reflected 80-90% (mean 85%) of PAR safely evacuating following the hurricane evacuation order <Citation citationKey="Jonkman2009"/>. Uniform uncertainty 
distribution was implemented. The warning diffusion (**First Alert**) curve was developed for Katrina using Sorensen & Mileti research <Citation citationKey="SorensenMileti2018"/>. 
Note that warning is distributed to 100% of PAR after less than five hours.

### Alternative

The evauation of southeast Louisiana had begun approximately two days before Katrina's landfal <Citation citationKey="Boyd2010"/>.
The mayor of NOLA issued the official evacuation order of NOLA at 9:25 AM on August 28, 2005 <Citation citationKey="CNN2005"/>, approximately one day before landfall. The 
**Imminent Hazard Identification** is set to -24 hours with zero **Hazard Communication Delay** due to the long warning time. 
{/*No modelling conclusion section?*/}
## Model Version

The original LifeSim model was developed in 2016-2017 using LifeSim version 1.0. The public model was updated in 2025 to LifeSim version 2.1.5 and produced 
negligible changes from the documented results. 

<CitationFootnote />

Commit message:

Responded and/or resolved Woody's comments for the Validation Studies.

docs/desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies/v1.0/05-katrina-east-bowl.mdx, after:

---
title: "Katrina - East Bowl"
---

import NavContainer from "@site/src/components/NavContainer";
import VersionSelector from "@site/src/components/VersionSelector";
import Link from "@docusaurus/Link";
import addBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import Citation from "@site/src/components/Citation";
import CitationFootnote from "@site/src/components/CitationFootnote";
import TableVertical from "@site/src/components/TableVertical";
import Figure from "@site/src/components/Figure";
import FigReference from "@site/src/components/FigureReference";
import FigureInline from "@site/src/components/FigureInline";
import TableReference from "@site/src/components/TableReference";
import Button from '@site/src/components/Button';

<NavContainer 
  link="/desktop-applications/lifesim"
  linkTitle="LifeSim"
  document="desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies"
></NavContainer>

# Hurricane Katrina - New Orleans East Bowl

New Orleans Levee System during Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans (East Bowl only), Louisiana, United States.

<Button href="https://www.rmc.usace.army.mil/Software/LifeSim/"><u>🡇</u> Download Model</Button>

## Overview

Hurricane Katrina (Katrina) formed as a tropical depression over the southeastern Bahamas on August 23, 2005. Katrina intensified after making landfall in southern Florida and became a 
Category 5 with peak winds of 175 mph; it was one of the most devastating natural disasters in United States history <Citation citationKey="NWS_Katrina_2005"/>.

Katrina had weakened to a Category 3 when it made landfall in New Orleans, Louisiana (NOLA) the morning of August 29, 2005. Life loss and property damage were exacerbated in 
NOLA due to the levee failures across the city; “The majority… of the flooding and half of the economic losses can be attributed to water flowing through breaches in floodwalls 
and levees” <Citation citationKey="USACE2006"/>. Primarily overtopping and subsequent erosion, 50 levees and floodwalls in NOLA failed during this catastrophic event. Approximately 80% of 
the city was flooded – causing over 1,400 NOLA fatalities and hundreds of thousands displaced <Citation citationKey="NYT2015"/>.

<Figure
  figKey="nola-flooded"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies/v1.0/figures/figure15.png"
  alt="NOLA blooded during Hurricane Katrina due to l-wall breach."
  caption={
    <>
      Flooded homes from Hurricane Katrina l-wall breach on London Avenue Outfall Canal in New Orleans. <Citation citationKey="USACE2006"/>
    </>
  }
/>

This validation data set focuses on NOLA East Bowl (highlighted red in <FigReference figKey="katrina-nola-map"/> below). According to <FigReference figKey="katrina-nola-map"/>, 
of the 27,986 housing units in New Orleans East, 79% was flooded, and 9.4% was over seven feet of inundation. NOLA East Bowl is comprised of sub-divisions, large business and manufacturing 
areas, and a wildlife refuge. It had an estimated population of 96,400 people and average income of $41,997 in August 2005 <Citation citationKey="NYT2015"/>. Of the NOLA East Bowl inhabitants, 9,620 were 
classified as exposed – meaning they were in the inundation area when the levees failed <Citation citationKey="Jonkman2009"/>.

Reported flood fatalities in NOLA East Bowl is 54 <Citation citationKey="Boyd2011"/>.

<Figure
  figKey="katrina-nola-map"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies/v1.0/figures/figure16.png"
  alt="NOLA inundation map August 31, 2005"
  caption={
    <>
      Extent and Depth of Flooding August 31, 2005 New Orleans Parish, LA. <Citation citationKey="NOAA2005"/>
    </>
  }
/>

## Data

The following provides a short description of the data sources used for validation.

### Hydraulics

A calibrated HEC-RAS hydraulic model was sourced from the 2006 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) *Performance Evaluation of the New Orleans and 
Southeast Louisiana Hurricane Protection System* Interagency Performance Evaluation Task Force (IPET) study.

*"An intense performance evaluation of the New Orleans and Southeast Louisiana Hurricane Protection System during Katrina. It was conducted by the [IPET], a distinguished group of 
government, academic, and private sector scientists and engineers who dedicated themselves to this task from shortly after Katrina 
struck through the start of the next hurricane season. Created by
the Chief of Engineers, [USACE] and peer reviewed literally on a weekly
basis by an equally distinguished external review panel of the American Society of Civil
Engineers, the group applied some of the most sophisticated capabilities available in civil
engineering to understand what happened during Katrina and why. Their purpose was not just
new knowledge, but application of that knowledge to the repair and reconstitution of protection
in New Orleans as well as improvement to engineering practice and policies."* <Citation citationKey="USACE2006"/>

### Structure Inventory

The structure inventory originated from 2015 parcel data, distributed 2004 population data, and manually-calibrated missing structures. Pre-Katrina aerial imagery was 
utilized for missing structures, and population inputs are reflective of the NOLA East Bowl pre-Katrina. The 2015 parcel dataset was obtained from the City of New Orleans 
and calibrated to the NOLA East Bowl breach event. 

Comprehensive study data available in *Loss of Life Estimation in Flood Risk Assessment, Theory and Applications*, authored by Jonkman, S. of Delft University, was used to 
validate human fatality rates and population at risk (PAR) <Citation citationKey="Jonkman2007"/>.

### Road Network

Traffic evacuations were not simulated. Therefore, a road network was not configured.

### Destinations

Traffic evacuations were not simulated. Therefore, destinations were not configured.

### Emergency Planning Zones

The **Emergency Planning Zone** (EPZ) is set to one area that covers the entirety of NOLA East Bowl. 

- Zero **Warning Issuance Delay** was implemented in the model due to the long warning time.
- The warning diffusion (**First Alert**) curve was developed for Katrina using Sorensen & Mileti research <Citation citationKey="SorensenMileti2018"/>. 
Note that warning is distributed to 100% of PAR after less than five hours.
- The **Protective Action Initation** (PAI) curve reflected 80-90% (mean 85%) of PAR safely evacuating following the hurricane evacuation order,
developed based on Jonkman (2019) research and findings <Citation citationKey="Jonkman2009"/>. Uniform uncertainty distribution was implemented. 

### Alternative

The evauation of southeast Louisiana had begun approximately two days before Katrina's landfal <Citation citationKey="Boyd2010"/>.
The mayor of NOLA issued the official evacuation order of NOLA at 9:25 AM on August 28, 2005 <Citation citationKey="CNN2005"/>, approximately one day before landfall. The 
**Imminent Hazard Identification** is set to -24 hours with zero **Hazard Communication Delay** due to the long warning time. 
{/*No modelling conclusion section?*/}
{/*Response to above: no official report located yet, aside from a presentation from Morrill-Winter dated June 2018.
   No slides were available regarding modeling conclusions. Did not want to draw my (Mai) own*/}
## Model Version

The original LifeSim model was developed in 2016-2017 using LifeSim version 1.0. The public model was updated in 2025 to LifeSim version 2.1.5 and produced 
negligible changes from the documented results. 

<CitationFootnote />
