docs/desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies/v1.0/06-kelly-barnes.mdx, before:

---
title: "Kelly Barnes"
---

import NavContainer from "@site/src/components/NavContainer";
import VersionSelector from "@site/src/components/VersionSelector";
import Link from "@docusaurus/Link";
import addBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import Citation from "@site/src/components/Citation";
import CitationFootnote from "@site/src/components/CitationFootnote";
import TableVertical from "@site/src/components/TableVertical";
import Figure from "@site/src/components/Figure";
import FigReference from "@site/src/components/FigureReference";
import FigureInline from "@site/src/components/FigureInline";
import TableReference from "@site/src/components/TableReference";
import Button from '@site/src/components/Button';

<NavContainer 
  link="/desktop-applications/lifesim"
  linkTitle="LifeSim"
  document="desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies"
></NavContainer>

# Kelly Barnes

Kelly Barnes Dam in Toccoa Falls, Georgia, United States.

<Button href="https://www.rmc.usace.army.mil/Software/LifeSim/">Download Model</Button>

## Overview

Kelly Barnes Dam – located above the Toccoa Falls Bible College near Toccoa, Georgia – failed in the early morning hours of November 6, 1977. The flood 
wave plummeted over the 186-foot tall Toccoa Falls and crashed through the Toccoa Falls College community. The resulting flood caused 39 fatalities and inundated 
a majority of the college campus (<FigReference figKey="dorm-flooded"/>), nearby residential homes, and a downstream trailer park.

The Kelly Barnes Dam breach was chosen for the LifeSim validation effort because many of the details of the event were diligently recorded by both engineers 
and historians. In the community impacted, data is available to locate nearly every structure and fatality in the wake of the flood. Also available are 
written and detailed firsthand accounts of the flood, which allow for uniquely detailed comparisons between the model and historical accounts that are impossible 
in most cases due to lack of data. 

<Figure
  figKey="dorm-flooded"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies/v1.0/figures/figure6.png"
  alt="Downstream dorm flooded to the second floor and resulted in three deaths."
  caption={
    <>
      Aftermath of Toccoa Falls Bible College dorm flooding to second story; dorm inundation resulted in three fatalities. <Citation citationKey="damfailures_barnes"/>
    </>
  }
/>

## Data

The following provides a short description of the data sources used for validation. 

### Hydraulics

A single hydraulic event was created for this analysis based on *Report of Failure of Kelly Barnes Dam, Toccoa, GA* published by the Federal Investigative Board 
in 1977 <Citation citationKey="FIB1977"/> and the USGS Hydrologic Investigations Atlas HA-613 <Citation citationKey="Sanders1979"/>.

Hydrologic Engineering Center's River Analysis System (HEC-RAS) version 5.0.7 was used to develop a 2-dimensional (2D) hydraulic model of the study area. The hydraulic model begins at Barnes Lake and ends at Highway 17. 
Water is routed from both the primary and secondary spillways until failure.

The terrain used for this model originates from a 3m resolution DEM obtained from the USDA Data Gateway as part of the National Elevation Dataset (NED). 
A new spillway profile was cut into the terrain using tools available in HEC-RAS and elevations provided in HA-613.

### Structure Inventory

Structures included in the structure inventory were located and defined based on the building footprint maps included as part of the USGS HA-613 <Citation citationKey="Sanders1979"/> 
and *Dam Break in 
Georgia: Sadness and Joy at Toccoa Falls* <Citation citationKey="Foster1978"/>. More information was found from Google Earth aerial imagery, as well as 
photographs and personal testimony provided by the Toccoa Falls College.  

The population data for the structure inventory was created using only historical accounts and documents which linked population to structures at the time 
of the flood. This data is based primarily on *Dam Break in Georgia: Sadness and Joy at Toccoa Falls* <Citation citationKey="Foster1978"/>. This publication includes details and personal stories 
from the night of the flood and accounts for the locations and nature of all 39 fatalities. 

### Road Network

The road network was imported from Open Street Map <Citation citationKey="OSM"/> and minor modifications were made to match historical images.

The road network and destinations, however, have very little impact on model results due to the very short warning time. In very few iterations are there 
any evacuations on the road network. The road network is used more heavily during the MMC methodology validation simulations.

### Destinations

Destinations were chosen at four locations to allow evacuees the most direct route to high ground. 

The road network and destinations, however, have very little impact on model results due to the very short warning time. In very few iterations are there 
any evacuations on the road network. The road network is used more heavily during the MMC methodology validation simulations.

### Emergency Planning Zones

Toccoa Falls was modeled under a single **Emergency Planning Zone** (EPZ). **First Alert** and **Protective Action Initiation** were set to unknown, as both of these 
parameters are dependent on the readiness of the community – of which there is very little data to inform. 

A sensitivity analysis was done on this parameter by creating two alternative EPZs using the default slow and fast parameters. Due to the short warning 
time, the effect of these parameters is negligible. Among the sensitivity analysis alternatives, mean life loss varies between 48.69 and 48.90.

### Alternative

No formal warning was issued during the Kelly Barnes Dam breach because the hazard was not identified until the flood wave reached town. For this reason, 
the **Imminent Hazard ID Time** is set to 0.2 hours after the breach, which is the amount of time post-breach it takes the flood wave to reach the upstream end of 
town and marks the location where the danger can first be seen from town. 

**Hazard Communication Delay** and **Warning Issuance Delay** do not accurately represent the warning scenario because evacuation is driven by individuals seeing 
the threat, choosing to evacuate, or choosing to warn neighbors. In this scenario, there is no communicating the threat to an emergency management entity 
or issuing a warning; therefore, these parameters are set to zero.

## Modeling Conclusion

Key factors that led to differences between survey estimate life loss versus LifeSim life loss estimates include information gaps in Population-at-Risk 
(PAR) Warned and PAR Mobilized, hydraulic modeling inaccuracies, and the inability for LifeSim to model the thousands of rescues that took place. 

## Model Version

The original LifeSim model was developed in 2019 using LifeSim version 2.0. The public model was updated in 2025 to LifeSim version 2.1.5 and produced 
negligible changes from the original documented results. 

<CitationFootnote />

Commit message:

- Completed Katrina validation subpage - Read through all of Validation Studies and made minor grammatical revisions throughout - Replaced sitewide "ESRI" with "Esri" to match official company's website - Revised sitewide table headers to be one shade lighter as to not blend with sitewide "RMC Software Documentation" header" - Revised sitewide table striping to have dark mode contrast - Revised Risher's Midland map to match sitewide color scheme

docs/desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies/v1.0/06-kelly-barnes.mdx, after:

---
title: "Kelly Barnes"
---

import NavContainer from "@site/src/components/NavContainer";
import VersionSelector from "@site/src/components/VersionSelector";
import Link from "@docusaurus/Link";
import addBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import Citation from "@site/src/components/Citation";
import CitationFootnote from "@site/src/components/CitationFootnote";
import TableVertical from "@site/src/components/TableVertical";
import Figure from "@site/src/components/Figure";
import FigReference from "@site/src/components/FigureReference";
import FigureInline from "@site/src/components/FigureInline";
import TableReference from "@site/src/components/TableReference";
import Button from '@site/src/components/Button';

<NavContainer 
  link="/desktop-applications/lifesim"
  linkTitle="LifeSim"
  document="desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies"
></NavContainer>

# Kelly Barnes

Kelly Barnes Dam in Toccoa Falls, Georgia, United States.

<Button href="https://www.rmc.usace.army.mil/Software/LifeSim/">Download Model</Button>

## Overview

Kelly Barnes Dam – located above the Toccoa Falls Bible College near Toccoa, Georgia – failed in the early morning hours of November 6, 1977. The flood 
wave plummeted over the 186-foot tall Toccoa Falls and crashed through the Toccoa Falls College community. The resulting flood caused 39 fatalities and inundated 
a majority of the college campus (<FigReference figKey="dorm-flooded"/>), nearby residential homes, and a downstream trailer park.

The Kelly Barnes Dam breach was chosen for the LifeSim validation effort because of the robust quantity of details diligently recorded by engineers 
and historians on the failure. In the community impacted, data is available to locate nearly every structure and fatality in the wake of the flood. Also available are 
written and detailed firsthand accounts of the flood, which allow for uniquely detailed comparisons between the model and historical accounts that are impossible 
in most cases due to lack of data. 

<Figure
  figKey="dorm-flooded"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/lifesim/validation-studies/v1.0/figures/figure6.png"
  alt="Downstream dorm flooded to the second floor and resulted in three deaths."
  caption={
    <>
      Aftermath of Toccoa Falls Bible College dorm flooding to second story; dorm inundation resulted in three fatalities. <Citation citationKey="damfailures_barnes"/>
    </>
  }
/>

## Data

The following provides a short description of the data sources used for validation. 

### Hydraulics

A single hydraulic event was created for this analysis based on *Report of Failure of Kelly Barnes Dam, Toccoa, GA* published by the Federal Investigative Board 
in 1977 <Citation citationKey="FIB1977"/> and the USGS Hydrologic Investigations Atlas HA-613 <Citation citationKey="Sanders1979"/>.

Hydrologic Engineering Center's River Analysis System (HEC-RAS) version 5.0.7 was used to develop a 2-dimensional (2D) hydraulic model of the study area. The hydraulic model begins at Barnes Lake and ends at Highway 17. 
Water is routed from both the primary and secondary spillways until failure.

The terrain used for this model originates from a 3m resolution DEM obtained from the USDA Data Gateway as part of the National Elevation Dataset (NED). 
A new spillway profile was cut into the terrain using tools available in HEC-RAS and elevations provided in HA-613.

### Structure Inventory

Structures included in the structure inventory were located and defined based on the building footprint maps included as part of the USGS HA-613 <Citation citationKey="Sanders1979"/> 
and *Dam Break in 
Georgia: Sadness and Joy at Toccoa Falls* <Citation citationKey="Foster1978"/>. More information was found from Google Earth aerial imagery, as well as 
photographs and personal testimony provided by the Toccoa Falls College.  

The population data for the structure inventory was created using only historical accounts and documents which linked population to structures at the time 
of the flood. This data is based primarily on *Dam Break in Georgia: Sadness and Joy at Toccoa Falls* <Citation citationKey="Foster1978"/>. This publication includes details and personal stories 
from the night of the flood and accounts for the locations and nature of all 39 fatalities. 

### Road Network and Destinations

The road network was imported from Open Street Map <Citation citationKey="OSM"/> and minor modifications were made to match historical images.

Destinations were chosen at four locations to allow evacuees the most direct route to high ground. 

The road network and destinations, however, have very little impact on model results due to the very short warning time. In very few iterations are there 
any evacuations on the road network. The road network is used more heavily for simulations created for validation of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
Modeling, Mapping, and Consequence (MMC) Production Center standard operating procedure.

### Emergency Planning Zones

Toccoa Falls was modeled under a single **Emergency Planning Zone** (EPZ). **First Alert** and **Protective Action Initiation** were set to unknown, as both of these 
parameters are dependent on the readiness of the community – of which there is very little data to inform. 

A sensitivity analysis was done on this parameter by creating two alternative EPZs using the default slow and fast parameters. Due to the short warning 
time, the effect of these parameters is negligible. Among the sensitivity analysis alternatives, mean life loss varies between 48.69 and 48.90.

### Alternative

No formal warning was issued during the Kelly Barnes Dam breach because the hazard was not identified until the flood wave reached town. For this reason, 
the **Imminent Hazard ID Time** is set to 0.2 hours after the breach, which is the amount of time post-breach it takes the flood wave to reach the upstream end of 
town and marks the location where the danger can first be seen from town. 

**Hazard Communication Delay** and **Warning Issuance Delay** do not accurately represent the warning scenario because evacuation is driven by individuals seeing 
the threat, choosing to evacuate, or choosing to warn neighbors. In this scenario, there is no communicating the threat to an emergency management entity 
or issuing a warning; therefore, these parameters are set to zero.

## Modeling Conclusion

Key factors that led to differences between survey estimate life loss versus LifeSim life loss estimates include information gaps in Population-at-Risk 
(PAR) Warned and PAR Mobilized, hydraulic modeling inaccuracies, and the inability for LifeSim to model the thousands of rescues that took place. 

## Model Version

The original LifeSim model was developed in 2019 using LifeSim version 2.0. The public model was updated in 2025 to LifeSim version 2.1.5 and produced 
negligible changes from the original documented results. 

<CitationFootnote />
