---
title: "Overview"
---

import NavContainer from "@site/src/components/NavContainer";
import VersionSelector from "@site/src/components/VersionSelector";
import Link from "@docusaurus/Link";
import addBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import CitationFootnote from "@site/src/components/CitationFootnote";
import Figure from "@site/src/components/Figure";
import FigReference from "@site/src/components/FigureReference";

<NavContainer 
  link="\web-applications\lst"
  linkTitle="Levee Screening Tool"
  document="web-applications\lst\users-guide"
></NavContainer>

# Overview

## Purpose of this document

The purpose of this application guide and technical reference manual is to help users of the Levee Screening Tool (LST) apply the various components
of the tool in a consistent manner.

## Overview of the Flood Risk Assessment Framework

Flood risk is a measure of the probability of inundation and the severity of consequences within an identified area given a specified climate
condition, land use condition, and flood management system (existing or planned). The consequences may be direct or indirect economic cost, loss of
life, environmental impact, or other specified measure due to flood effect.

Flood risk is a function of (1) flood hazard (also referred to as loading), which is the frequency and magnitude of loading; (2) performance of flood
risk reduction measures; and (3) consequences of inundation, which considers the exposure and vulnerability of people and property in the floodplain.
The components of risk are displayed in <FigReference figKey="figure-1" />.

<Figure
  figKey="figure-1"
  src="figures\web-applications\lst\users-guide\v1.0\figures\figure1.png"
  alt="Components of Flood Risk"
  caption="Components of Flood Risk"
/>

Flood management actions may reduce risk by changing one or more of these factors. Levees, in particular, limit exposure by excluding waters from a
floodplain. Water will move into the leveed area from a riverine or coastal flood source only when the levee is overtopped, breaches, or malfunctions.
 Property located at an elevation lower than the water surface elevation will be inundated. The property may be damaged, with the economic cost of
that damage depending on the water <em>depth</em> (the difference between water surface elevation and property elevation). Life loss may occur
depending on the effectiveness of evacuation and the resulting inundation severity (depth, velocity, arrival time, etc.).

In a risk assessment, the factors (hazard, performance, exposure, vulnerability, and consequence) are combined to obtain a probability distribution of
 potential consequence. The average annual consequence computed from this distribution is referred to as the <em>expected annual </em>or<em> average
annual flood risk.</em> Expected annual damage (EAD) is a commonly used term to describe the average annual economic inundation risk.

## Overview of the USACE Levee Screening Process

The USACE levee screening process identifies and evaluates the hazard, performance, and consequence issues associated with a levee, and assesses the
flood risk. The goal of a levee screening is to improve the understanding of the hazard exposure to a levee and community behind, the expected
performance of the levee, and the benefits and consequences associated with the levee.  For portfolio managers, like USACE, a screening risk estimate
informs the urgency of actions that need to be taken to reduce flood risk. For example, USACE uses a portfolio management system called the Levee
Safety Action Classification (LSAC). The LSAC informs the prioritization and communication of risk management activities. These activities include
interim risk reduction measures, permanent risk reduction measures, and more robust risk assessments.

In a levee assessment, screeners use existing information to make judgments about the ability of the levee to perform as intended. Existing
information might include reports from routine inspections and periodic inspections, design analyses, design or as-built drawings, observed
performance during flood events, and national datasets such as the national elevation dataset and the National Structure Inventory (NSI) database.

This information is reviewed by a team of screeners comprising qualified levee safety professionals. Specific qualifications needed may vary from one
levee to another, but expertise typically required on a screening team includes hydrology, hydraulics, geotechnical engineering, structural
engineering, emergency management, and consequence assessment. Members of the screening team use the LST to characterize and document their
understanding of the levee and develop a quantitative assessment of the risk.

The levee screening inputs and outputs, along with other available information, are checked for quality and consistency by various review activities,
starting with the team performing the risk assessment and culminating with the team charged with national-level consistency. The levee owner/operator,
 as a member of the risk assessment team, is requested to review and participate in vertical review milestones. When the review is completed, the
national review team develops a preliminary recommendation for risk classification.

The screening information and classification recommendation are submitted to a group of senior level decision makers that develop a formal
recommendation for classification. The USACE Levee Safety Officer then renders a decision on the classification for the levee.

The results of a screening are used by levee owners to prioritize flood risk management actions and can be utilized by other stakeholders and the
public to inform actions, such as emergency planning or land use decisions.

## Scoping the Assessment

### Levee Segment vs. Levee System

A levee system refers to all features that are collectively integral to excluding flood water from the leveed area.  The term levee segment is used to
 identify a discrete portion of a levee system that is operated and maintained by a single levee sponsor. Levee systems can be comprised of one or
more segments.

Levees are screened by segment in the LST, but the goal is to develop an understanding of the system risk. Segments are typically defined according to
 which entity is responsible for operating and maintaining a portion of the levee system. Segments can also be highways, railroad embankments or other
 “non-project features” that act to exclude flood water from the floodplain. Non-project features or segments are considered to be part of a levee
system for evaluation purposes and are to be evaluated with the same criteria and processes as structures and features specifically planned and constructed
 as components of the flood risk reduction system. Non-project segments were not accessible for inspection and lack relevant condition information to
inform the risk assessment have a unique evaluation process (See Appendix B).

For systems with more than one segment, all segments making up that system must be completed, reviewed, and approved at the same time.

The classification for the levee system is obtained by adopting the worst (highest risk) classification for any segment within the system as the
classification for the overall system.

## Overview of the Levee Screening Tool

The LST is a Web-based tool that facilitates the collection, organization, evaluation, and reporting of information about the hazards, expected levee
performance, and associated risks of levees. With the tool, users combine routine inspection information (from the National Levee Database (NLD) and
elsewhere) with existing, readily available hazard (loading) and performance information, along with engineering judgment, to describe the ability of
a levee system to perform as intended, and the potential consequences of failure.

The analyst produced LST results – and most importantly the levee risk characterization - are used to tell the story of risks and benefits a levee
provides to a community. Portfolio management tools, like the USACE LSAC, prioritize the systems that should undergo further evaluation, and to
determine whether funding repair or improvement is the most efficient use of funds from an overall risk reduction perspective. Levees identified as
high risk through this screening process are targeted for interim risk reduction measures and receive priority for implementing more robust risk
assessments. Levee screening results are communicated to owners, stakeholders, and the public for prioritization and action.

## Simplified risk assessment used in levee screening process

The LST uses a simplified, scalable risk assessment approach found in industry best practices for dam and levee risk analysis.

### Flood risk and inundation scenarios considered in the screening

The LST analysis will allow users to view and better understand the contribution of the levee risk, non-breach risk, and flood risk. The term flood
risk is used to describe the risk of flooding in the area behind the levee regardless of what led to that flooding. The term levee risk is used to
refer to the risk due to potential poor performance of the levee itself, which has also been referred to as incremental risk historically. Non-breach
risk is the risk due to capacity exceedance if the levee was “unbreachable”, meaning the potential for poor performance of the existing levee was
zero, and the only risk was due to overtopping without breach.

Harm to floodplain occupants (the consequence component of risk) comes about as a result of inundation. Thus, it is useful to view the risk posed by
the presence of the levee systems in terms of the four inundation scenarios represented in <FigReference figKey="figure-2" />. These four inundation
scenarios are:

1. Breach prior to overtopping – the levee breaches from a defect within the system.

1. Overtopping with breach – the levee overtops then breaches due to erosion.

1. Malfunction or improper operation of levee system components – a component of the levee fails, usually a pump station or closure structure.

1. Levee overtopping without breach (also referred to as non-breach) – floods exceed the capacity of the levee, but the levee does not breach.

The sum of these scenarios represents the Flood (Total) risk.

<Figure
  figKey="figure-2"
  src="figures\web-applications\lst\users-guide\v1.0\figures\figure2.png"
  alt="Levee segments are screened considering four inundation scenarios representing levee (incremental) risk and non-breach risk."
  caption="Levee segments are screened considering four inundation scenarios representing levee (incremental) risk and non-breach risk."
/>

The usefulness of considering multiple inundation scenarios and the levee risk, non-breach risk, flood risk model is for levee managers to clearly
understand what factor(s) are most influential in the likelihood of inundation and the benefit of the levee in the context of total flood risk.
Reference Chapter 7 and Chapter 8 for more discussion on how the LST computes risk and how to interpret the results.

### Risk described with hazard, performance, and consequence

Three factors—hazard, performance, and consequence—are considered explicitly in LST 2.0 as follows:

- Hazard (Loading) - The hazard function is represented by what is often called a <em>stage-frequency curve</em>, which represents the likelihood of
different load levels up against or over the levee in any given year. The LST does not consider other types of loading such as seismic loading.

- Performance - Levee performance, which is how the levee segment in question will react to the loading, is described by a <em>system response
curve</em>. The system response curve represents the likelihood that the levee will breach when faced with a range of loading (hazard). System
response curves for failure modes that occur prior to overtopping, such as seepage and piping and floodwall stability, are based on an engineering
assessment of levee performance for a flood loading at the top of the levee. For overtopping, system response is based on an engineering assessment of
 levee performance when 1 foot of water is flowing over the top of the levee. In each case, the system response for other hazard levels is based on
information from the levee incident database.

- Consequence - Consequences are represented by an estimate of potential fatalities and economic damages for a levee breach under various hazard
levels, including 50%, 75%, 100% for breach prior to overtopping, and 100% +1, +2, and +3 ft for overtopping.

## Limitations

The LST is not designed for all specific cases. Assessors may be able to account for those cases qualitatively or users will need to scope a
higher-level risk assessment.

### Other hazards not explicitly accounted for in quantitative risk estimate

Seismic and other non-flooding conditions are not explicitly considered in the quantitative risk estimate for a levee.

Seismic: Most levees are not subjected to water loading frequently enough or for a sufficient duration each year to justify consideration of
coincident seismic and water loads at the screening level. Potential risks associated with seismic loading for levees subjected to water loading for
extended periods of time each year should be qualitatively described during the screening process and considered when developing recommendations and
prioritizing actions.

Although it is possible in some cases for a levee to be damaged by a seismic event making it vulnerable to water loading prior to repairs being made,
the level of effort required to evaluate this condition quantitatively is beyond the scope of the Levee Screening Tool. The potential for life loss,
which is the primary consideration in levee safety decisions, should be relatively low for this scenario since there would be heightened awareness,
increased monitoring, and effective warnings and evacuations. If potential consequences for levees associated with seismic loading and water loading
during the period of repair are of significant concern, they should be described qualitatively during the screening process and considered when
developing recommendations and prioritizing actions.

Interior Drainage (Pluvial Hazard): Non-breach consequences associated with pluvial hazard and the capacity of interior drainage components to
mitigate those flood risks are beyond the scope of the Levee Screening Tool. Appreciable flood risk associated with project interior drainage features
 will need to be handled qualitatively.

### Potential failure modes not explicitly accounted for in quantitative risk estimate.

The LST adopted a streamlined approach to potential failure mode analysis. Seven common, broadly defined, levee potential failure modes are provided
in the LST for evaluation. If the assessment team determines that risk for a levee segment is driven by a failure mode not included in the LST, they
should describe these limitations and perceived impacts to the risk estimate qualitatively in the Major Findings section of the LST.

### Screening assessment scope

The LST is not designed for certain specific cases. Assessors may be able to account for those cases qualitatively or users will need to scope a
higher-level risk assessment.

### The Levee Screening Tool as a tool

The LST is only a tool to help users understand complex interaction of hazard, performance, and consequence on the nature of risk for the levee. Users
 must have technical competency to complete the assessment and to interpret the results. An understanding of the uncertainty of input data, internal
LST computations, and meaning of the results is needed. Engineering judgment must be applied when interpreting and acting on the LST results. The
results can guide decision makers but should not be taken as infallible.

## Levee Screening Tool input requirements

The LST requires a relatively minimal level of input data to generate a risk estimate. Those requirements are described below for each of the primary
components of risk: flood hazard, performance, and consequences. If the minimum level of information is not available for a specific segment, then
screening of that segment should be put on hold until the appropriate information has been gathered.

### Flood hazard information requirements

Minimum flood hazard inputs for the LST include an estimate of the annual exceedance probability (AEP) for water surface elevations at the toe and top
 of the levee, as well as the AEP for 3 feet of overtopping. This information is derived from a water surface elevation-probability relationship for
the levee segment. This relationship can be obtained using various methods, such as a discharge-probability function with a discharge-elevation
function (rating curve) or probability-based water surface profiles. Typical sources of information include regional regression equations for
discharge, gage discharge data, flood insurance studies, gage rating curves, and rating curves from project design documents. More guidance on how to
develop these inputs is provided in Chapter 4.

### Performance information requirements

The performance assessment in the LST relies primarily on engineering judgment in interpreting best available information about the design, construction,
 condition, geologic conditions, and past performance history of the levee features (earthen embankments, floodwalls, and closure systems). That
judgment requires some basic level of information to support the assessment. If available, an understanding of historic performance (whether good or
bad) under significant load levels is invaluable for decreasing uncertainty in the performance assessment. Historic performance also includes an
understanding of any flood fighting activities that took place.

Additionally, other information such as the most recent inspection, design documents or drawings, maintenance records, geotechnical data reports, and
geologic conditions should be identified and used when available to provide additional evidence in support of the performance assessment.

For segments that contain closure systems, information must be available that indicates existence of written operating plans, most recent inspection
date and condition of parts, experience of personnel, history of performance, and other documentation or supporting photos.

The ability to floodfight (detect and intervene) to halt the progression of a failure mode is also considered in the evaluation of levee performance.
Floodfighting manuals, plans, inventory of emergency stockpiled materials/equipment, documentation of training or experience, etc. will be assembled
to support the assessment.

### Consequence information requirements

The minimum information required for assessment of consequence can be broken down into two categories: 1) data requirements for inundation and 2) data
 requirements for potential economic and life loss estimate.

For inundation modeling, the LST requires a levee segment alignment with top-of-levee elevation, a leveed area polygon, and a digital elevation model
for the leveed area. These are all available through the National Levee Database but can be refined in the LST if necessary. The simplified HEC-RAS
methodology used in the LST for modeling inundation also requires a rudimentary hydrograph for each flood scenario and description of the erodibility
of the levee embankment. Additional inputs can be provided to further refine the inundation estimate but are not required for the basic approach.

Potential economic and life loss estimates provided by the LST are generated using a simplified LifeSim approach. This requires a structure inventory
with population and property value for the leveed area. LifeSim also requires basic information related to the community’s evacuation planning,
warning dissemination systems, general flood risk awareness, and amount of warning time. The population and property values are pulled from the
National Structure Inventory (NSI) for leveed areas defined in the NLD.

## Screening Results & Major Findings

The desired outcome from a levee screening is an improved understanding of the type and magnitude of risks and benefits of the levee system including
the risk-drivers.

The Results module in the LST provides numerical and graphical representation of levee and flood risks and benefits. Major findings from the screening
 effort – including risk drivers, key findings on the hazard, performance, consequences, and identified data gaps or uncertainties are documented in
the Major Findings tab in the LST.

## Levee Safety Action Classification

After the levee system has been screened, it is classified according to the Levee Safety Action Classification (LSAC) system. The LSAC system is used
to guide USACE decisions about additional risk management activities for the levee system in question. All levee systems are assigned an LSAC informed
 by the most recent risk assessment. The most recent risk assessment may be screening or a more rigorous risk assessment (semi-quantitative or
quantitative). The LSAC of a levee system may change as a levee system is modified or more refined information becomes available that affects any of
the risk determinants.

The five classes used in the USACE levee safety portfolio risk management process are:

- Class 1 – Very High Risk

- Class 2 – High Risk

- Class 3 – Moderate Risk

- Class 4 – Low Risk

- Class 5 – Very Low Risk

More information on the LSAC system and its role in the portfolio management process is provided in the USACE Levee Safety Program policies.

## A note on terminology

The text in this document uses the following terminology wherever appropriate:

- “Function” or “relationship” instead of “curve.”

- “Probability” instead of “frequency” or “likelihood”.

- “Discharge” instead of “flow.”

- “System Response” instead of “fragility”

For example, a flow-frequency curve is referred to herein as a discharge-probability function.

The term “water surface elevation” is used instead of “stage” to indicate a vertical distance to a selected vertical datum. The LST uses the USACE
standard, which is the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88). “Elevation” is to be distinguished from depth at a site measured relative to a
local site datum.

Note that while this document aims for consistency in its use of terms, the LST user will see the terms curve, frequency, stage, and flow on some of
the LST pages (and the text reflects what is on the page when referring to particular LST features).

## Training and other resources

Users of the Levee Screening Tool have access to resources to aid in their understanding and proper execution of this software. The user must take
responsibility to have the proper experience and training for proper usage and application of this tool. For internal USACE users, standard operating
procedures including specific policy, procedures, and requirements are documented in “Levee Screening Risk Assessments: Standard Operating Procedures”
 (2024).

The USACE Risk Management Center has a dam and levee safety training suite. Many of the available courses provide relevant content to improve
understanding of risk, levee safety, probability and statistics, facilitation, consequences assessment, levee potential failure modes, etc. The
DLS-112: Levee Screening Tool Facilitator course is specifically designed to train people to use the Levee Screening Tool and lead a team of subject
matter experts to perform screenings on levee systems. Course availability is shown on the RMC training website:

You can also send an email to  if you cannot find a solution to your issues in the existing help documents.

<CitationFootnote />