docs/desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit/users-guide/v1.0/01-welcome-to-rmc-bestfit.mdx, before:

---
title: Welcome to RMC-BestFit
---

import NavContainer from "@site/src/components/NavContainer";
import VersionSelector from "@site/src/components/VersionSelector";
import Link from "@docusaurus/Link";
import addBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import Figure from "@site/src/components/Figure";
import FigReference from "@site/src/components/FigureReference";
import CitationFootnote from "@site/src/components/CitationFootnote";

<NavContainer
  link="/desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit"
  linkTitle="RMC-BestFit"
  document="desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit/users-guide"
/>

# Welcome to RMC-BestFit

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Risk Management Center (RMC), in collaboration with the Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC)
Coastal and Hydraulics Laboratory (CHL), developed the Bayesian estimation and fitting software (RMC-BestFit) to enhance and expedite flood hazard
assessments within the Flood Risk Management, Planning, and Dam and Levee Safety communities of practice.

RMC-BestFit is a menu-driven software package, which performs distribution fitting and Bayesian estimation from a choice of thirteen probability
distributions. The software features a fully integrated modeling platform, including a modern graphical user interface, data entry capabilities,
distribution fitting analysis, Bayesian estimation analysis, and report quality charts.

## Why you should use RMC-BestFit

In Bayesian estimation, the values of the probability distribution parameters converge to a distribution rather than to a single best value.
Quantification of the parameter uncertainty is particularly important in risk analysis because it allows you to assess the value of reducing the
uncertainty. Typically, the parameter uncertainty can be reduced with more and better information through means of additional measurement, data
collection and quality control, filling gaps in missing gage data, and record extension. With Bayesian analysis, we can also specify our prior
knowledge on the parameters through expert elicitation, causal modelling, or regional analysis.

The Bayesian approach is capable of incorporating all available sources of information into an analysis. For example, in a Bayesian flood frequency
analysis, at-site gage data, paleoflood information, regional information, and causal rainfall-runoff results can be incorporated into the flood
frequency curve, which can then be used to evaluate reservoir pool stage-frequency for use in Dam Safety risk assessments.

The Bayesian estimation approach is flexible and coherent. Its assumptions are made explicit, and the analysis is repeatable and revisable. The
ability of the Bayesian approach to use all pieces of information in conjunction is a major advantage over other traditional statistical methods, such
 as those that are recommended in Bulletin 17B  and Bulletin 17C.

When should you use RMC-BestFit? Any time you perform a risk analysis that involves uncertainty, you can and should use RMC-BestFit. Typical
applications in science and engineering include reliability analysis, and rainfall and flood frequency analysis.

## System Requirements

The RMC-BestFit program and all dependent libraries were developed using the .NET Framework 4.6.1. As such, the program is currently only available
for the Microsoft Windows operating system. The recommended system configuration for RMC-BestFit includes:

- 64-bit Windows Operating System (Windows 7 or newer)
- 512MB of RAM at a minimum
- 2GB of free disk space at a minimum
- Quad-Core CPU with 2.7GHz (or faster) clock speed
- 1280x1024 screen resolution or higher (and at least a 17" monitor)
## Installing RMC-BestFit

RMC-BestFit version 1.0 is available as a portable package (.zip). Installing with a portable package does not require administrative rights. Simply
extract all contents of the portable package to the desired computer location. After extraction, the package contents will look as shown in
<FigReference figKey="installing-rmcbestfit" />. Simply double-click the executable **RMC-BestFit.exe** to get started. For easy access to the
program, you can create a desktop shortcut and pin the program to your Windows taskbar.

<Figure
  figKey="installing-rmcbestfit"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit/users-guide/figure1.png"
  alt="Installing RMC-BestFit."
  caption="Installing RMC-BestFit."
/>

### Setting the File Association in Windows

RMC-BestFit files have the “**.bestfit**” file extension. To have Windows automatically open**.bestfit** files with RMC-BestFit, first right-click a
**.bestfit** project file.Select **Open with…** from the resulting menu.

<Figure
  figKey="rightclick-menu-for"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit/users-guide/figure2.png"
  alt="Right-Click Menu for Project File in Windows."
  caption="Right-Click Menu for Project File in Windows."
/>

Then, from the menu that appears when you select **Open with..*****.***, click **Try an appon this PC** for an expanded list of already installed
applications. If you do not see RMC-BestFit, scroll to the bottom and select**Look for another app on this PC**. This will open a Windows Explorer
dialog. Navigate to and select the executable **RMC-BestFit.exe**, then click** Open. **When you’ve found RMC-BestFit and it has been selected, check
the box labeled **Always use this app to open[.bestfit] files**before you click the **OK **button. Now **.bestfit** files will appear in Windows
Explorer with the RMC-BestFit icon. You can now double-click a project file to automatically open it with RMC-BestFit.

<Figure
  figKey="rmcbestfit-project-with"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit/users-guide/figure3.png"
  alt="RMC-BestFit Project with File Association in Windows."
  caption="RMC-BestFit Project with File Association in Windows."
/>

## Terms and Conditions for Use

The United States Government, US Army Corps of Engineers, Risk Management Center ("RMC") grants to the user the rights to install RMC-BestFit "the
Software" (either from a copy obtained from RMC, a distributor or another user or by downloading it from a network) and to use, copy and/or distribute
 copies of the Software to other users, subject to the following Terms and Conditions of Use:

All copies of the Software received or reproduced by or for user pursuant to the authority of this Terms and Conditions of Use will be and remain the
property of RMC. User may reproduce and distribute the Software provided that the recipient agrees to the Terms and Conditions for Use noted herein.

RMC is solely responsible for the content of the Software. The Software may not be modified, abridged, decompiled, disassembled, unobfuscated or
reverse engineered. The user is solely responsible for the content, interactions, and effects of any and all amendments, if present, whether they be
extension modules, language resource bundles, scripts or any other amendment.

The name "RMC-BestFit" must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from the Software. Products derived from the Software may not be called
 "RMC-BestFit" nor may any part of the "RMC-BestFit" name appear within the name of derived products. No part of this Terms and Conditions for Use may
 be modified, deleted or obliterated from the Software. No part of the Software may be exported or re-exported in contravention of U.S. export laws or
 regulations.

### Waiver of Warranty

THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS PROVIDE RMC-BESTFIT
"AS IS," WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY OR CONDITION, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR STATUTORY, AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY,
 FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. Depending on state law, the foregoing disclaimer may not apply to you, and you may also have
other legal rights that vary from state to state.

### Limitation of Liability

IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS,
BE LIABLE FOR LOST PROFITS OR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH USE OF RMC-BESTFIT REGARDLESS OF
CAUSE, INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE.

THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT’S LIABILITY, AND THE LIABILITY OF ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND
SUPPLIERS, TO YOU OR ANY THIRD PARTIES IN ANY CIRCUMSTANCE IS LIMITED TO THE REPLACEMENT OF CERTIFIED COPIES OF RMC-BESTFIT WITH IDENTIFIED ERRORS
CORRECTED. Depending on state law, the above limitation or exclusion may not apply to you.

### Indemnity

As a voluntary user of RMC-BestFit you agree to indemnify and hold the United States Government, and its agencies, officials, representatives, and
employees, including its contractors and suppliers, harmless from any claim or demand, including reasonable attorneys' fees, made by any third party
due to or arising out of your use of RMC-BestFit or breach of this Agreement or your violation of any law or the rights of a third party.

### Assent

By using this program you voluntarily accept these terms and conditions. If you do not agree to these terms and conditions, uninstall the program and
return any program materials to RMC (If you downloaded the program and do not have disk media, please delete all copies, and cease using the program).

<CitationFootnote />

Commit message:

Updates to RMC-BestFit User's Guide and Table components
Revised RMC-BestFit User's Guide files.

Updated TableVertical and TableHorizontal components to move the table captions outside of the <table /> element to allow the captions to extend the width of the parent container when a partial width table is used.

docs/desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit/users-guide/v1.0/01-welcome-to-rmc-bestfit.mdx, after:

---
title: Welcome to RMC-BestFit
---

import NavContainer from "@site/src/components/NavContainer";
import VersionSelector from "@site/src/components/VersionSelector";
import Link from "@docusaurus/Link";
import addBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import Figure from "@site/src/components/Figure";
import FigReference from "@site/src/components/FigureReference";
import Citation from "@site/src/components/Citation";
import CitationFootnote from "@site/src/components/CitationFootnote";

<NavContainer
  link="/desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit"
  linkTitle="RMC-BestFit"
  document="desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit/users-guide"
/>

# Welcome to RMC-BestFit

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Risk Management Center (RMC), in collaboration with the Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC)
Coastal and Hydraulics Laboratory (CHL), developed the Bayesian estimation and fitting software (RMC-BestFit) to enhance and expedite flood hazard
assessments within the Flood Risk Management, Planning, and Dam and Levee Safety communities of practice.

RMC-BestFit is a menu-driven software package, which performs distribution fitting and Bayesian estimation from a choice of thirteen probability
distributions. The software features a fully integrated modeling platform, including a modern graphical user interface, data entry capabilities,
distribution fitting analysis, Bayesian estimation analysis, and report quality charts.

## Why you should use RMC-BestFit

In Bayesian estimation, the values of the probability distribution parameters converge to a distribution rather than to a single best value.
Quantification of the parameter uncertainty is particularly important in risk analysis because it allows you to assess the value of reducing the
uncertainty. Typically, the parameter uncertainty can be reduced with more and better information through means of additional measurement, data
collection and quality control, filling gaps in missing gage data, and record extension. With Bayesian analysis, we can also specify our prior
knowledge on the parameters through expert elicitation, causal modelling, or regional analysis.

The Bayesian approach is capable of incorporating all available sources of information into an analysis. For example, in a Bayesian flood frequency
analysis, at-site gage data, paleoflood information, regional information, and causal rainfall-runoff results can be incorporated into the flood
frequency curve, which can then be used to evaluate reservoir pool stage-frequency for use in Dam Safety risk assessments.

The Bayesian estimation approach is flexible and coherent. Its assumptions are made explicit, and the analysis is repeatable and revisable. The
ability of the Bayesian approach to use all pieces of information in conjunction is a major advantage over other traditional statistical methods, such
as those that are recommended in Bulletin 17B <Citation citationKey="USGS1982" /> and Bulletin 17C <Citation citationKey="USGS2018" />.

When should you use RMC-BestFit? Any time you perform a risk analysis that involves uncertainty, you can and should use RMC-BestFit. Typical
applications in science and engineering include reliability analysis, and rainfall and flood frequency analysis.

## System Requirements

The RMC-BestFit program and all dependent libraries were developed using the .NET Framework 4.6.1. As such, the program is currently only available
for the Microsoft Windows operating system. The recommended system configuration for RMC-BestFit includes:

- 64-bit Windows Operating System (Windows 7 or newer)
- 512MB of RAM at a minimum
- 2GB of free disk space at a minimum
- Quad-Core CPU with 2.7GHz (or faster) clock speed
- 1280x1024 screen resolution or higher (and at least a 17" monitor)

## Installing RMC-BestFit

RMC-BestFit version 1.0 is available as a portable package (.zip). Installing with a portable package does not require administrative rights. Simply
extract all contents of the portable package to the desired computer location. After extraction, the package contents will look as shown in

<FigReference figKey="installing-rmcbestfit" />. Simply double-click the executable **RMC-BestFit.exe** to get started. For easy access to the
program, you can create a desktop shortcut and pin the program to your Windows taskbar.

<Figure
  figKey="installing-rmcbestfit"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit/users-guide/figure1.png"
  alt="Installing RMC-BestFit."
  caption="Installing RMC-BestFit."
/>

### Setting the File Association in Windows

RMC-BestFit files have the “**.bestfit**” file extension. To have Windows automatically open**.bestfit** files with RMC-BestFit, first right-click a
**.bestfit** project file.Select **Open with…** from the resulting menu.

<Figure
  figKey="rightclick-menu-for"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit/users-guide/figure2.png"
  alt="Right-Click Menu for Project File in Windows."
  caption="Right-Click Menu for Project File in Windows."
/>

Then, from the menu that appears when you select **Open with...**, click **Try an appon this PC** for an expanded list of already installed
applications. If you do not see RMC-BestFit, scroll to the bottom and select**Look for another app on this PC**. This will open a Windows Explorer
dialog. Navigate to and select the executable **RMC-BestFit.exe**, then click** Open. **When you’ve found RMC-BestFit and it has been selected, check
the box labeled **Always use this app to open [.bestfit] files** before you click the **OK** button. Now **.bestfit** files will appear in Windows
Explorer with the RMC-BestFit icon. You can now double-click a project file to automatically open it with RMC-BestFit.

<Figure
  figKey="rmcbestfit-project-with"
  src="figures/desktop-applications/rmc-bestfit/users-guide/figure3.png"
  alt="RMC-BestFit Project with File Association in Windows."
  caption="RMC-BestFit Project with File Association in Windows."
/>

## Terms and Conditions for Use

The United States Government, US Army Corps of Engineers, Risk Management Center ("RMC") grants to the user the rights to install RMC-BestFit "the
Software" (either from a copy obtained from RMC, a distributor or another user or by downloading it from a network) and to use, copy and/or distribute
copies of the Software to other users, subject to the following Terms and Conditions of Use:

All copies of the Software received or reproduced by or for user pursuant to the authority of this Terms and Conditions of Use will be and remain the
property of RMC. User may reproduce and distribute the Software provided that the recipient agrees to the Terms and Conditions for Use noted herein.

RMC is solely responsible for the content of the Software. The Software may not be modified, abridged, decompiled, disassembled, unobfuscated or
reverse engineered. The user is solely responsible for the content, interactions, and effects of any and all amendments, if present, whether they be
extension modules, language resource bundles, scripts or any other amendment.

The name "RMC-BestFit" must not be used to endorse or promote products derived from the Software. Products derived from the Software may not be called
"RMC-BestFit" nor may any part of the "RMC-BestFit" name appear within the name of derived products. No part of this Terms and Conditions for Use may
be modified, deleted or obliterated from the Software. No part of the Software may be exported or re-exported in contravention of U.S. export laws or
regulations.

### Waiver of Warranty

THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS PROVIDE RMC-BESTFIT
"AS IS," WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY OR CONDITION, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR STATUTORY, AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. Depending on state law, the foregoing disclaimer may not apply to you, and you may also have
other legal rights that vary from state to state.

### Limitation of Liability

IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS,
BE LIABLE FOR LOST PROFITS OR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH USE OF RMC-BESTFIT REGARDLESS OF
CAUSE, INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE.

THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT’S LIABILITY, AND THE LIABILITY OF ITS AGENCIES, OFFICIALS, REPRESENTATIVES, AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING ITS CONTRACTORS AND
SUPPLIERS, TO YOU OR ANY THIRD PARTIES IN ANY CIRCUMSTANCE IS LIMITED TO THE REPLACEMENT OF CERTIFIED COPIES OF RMC-BESTFIT WITH IDENTIFIED ERRORS
CORRECTED. Depending on state law, the above limitation or exclusion may not apply to you.

### Indemnity

As a voluntary user of RMC-BestFit you agree to indemnify and hold the United States Government, and its agencies, officials, representatives, and
employees, including its contractors and suppliers, harmless from any claim or demand, including reasonable attorneys' fees, made by any third party
due to or arising out of your use of RMC-BestFit or breach of this Agreement or your violation of any law or the rights of a third party.

### Assent

By using this program you voluntarily accept these terms and conditions. If you do not agree to these terms and conditions, uninstall the program and
return any program materials to RMC (If you downloaded the program and do not have disk media, please delete all copies, and cease using the program).

<CitationFootnote />
