docs/00-documentation-guide/03-project-structure.mdx, before:

---
title: Project Structure
---

# Project Structure

The RMC Software Documentation project follows this structure:

```
RMC-SOFTWARE-DOCUMENTATION/
    build/                          # Generated static files after building for production
    docs/                           # Documentation files
        00-documentation-guide/     # Documentation guide for the project
        desktop-applications/       # Documentation for desktop applications
        toolbox-technical-manuals/  # Documentation for technical manuals
        web-applications/           # Documentation for web applications
    node_modules/                   # Installed dependencies
    scripts/                        # Custom scripts
        counters.js                 # Script for handling counters in the documentation
        generateReportIdMap.js      # Script for generating a report ID map for code automation
        generateSidebars.js         # Script to automatically build sidebars.js for the Docusaurus project
        versions.js                 # Script to aid in version control
    src/                            # Source code for custom components and pages
        components/                 # Custom React components
        contexts/                   # Context files
        css/                        # Custom CSS files
        pages/                      # Custom pages
        theme/                      # Custom theme files
        draftDocs.js                # Aggregates all document entries marked as draft
        reportIdMap.js              # Report ID file automatically built and updated by the generateReportIdMap.js file
    static/                         # Static files like images, fonts, etc.
        bibliographies/             # Bibliographies for citation and reference management
        counters/                   # Static files related to counters
        figures/                    # Figures for the documentation
        fonts/                      # Custom fonts
        img/                        # Images for the website
        versions/                   # JSON files for version control
    .gitattributes
    .gitignore                      # Git ignore file for the project
    .nojekyll
    docusaurus.config.js            # Main configuration file for Docusaurus
    LICENSE                         # License file
    package-lock.json               # Lock file for npm dependencies
    package.json                    # Project metadata and dependencies
    README.md                       # This file
    sidebars.js                     # Sidebar configuration for navigation
    zzz_future_improvements.md      # Placeholder for future improvements and enhancements
```

Use the sidebar to explore the differen project folders and files in detail.

Commit message:

Added docx_converter Python script to the project and revised the Documentation Guide
-Added docx_converter Python script to the project
-Revised the Documentation Guide for clarity
-Updated generateSidebars.js script to create Documentation Guide sidebar
-Updated custom.css to remove Preflight styling from standard Markdown content
-Updated .gitignore to ignore Python related cache

docs/00-documentation-guide/03-project-structure.mdx, after:

---
title: Project Structure
---

# Project Structure

The RMC Software Documentation project follows this structure:

```
RMC-SOFTWARE-DOCUMENTATION/
    build/                          # Generated static files after building for production
    docs/                           # Documentation files
        00-documentation-guide/     # Documentation guide for the project
        desktop-applications/       # Documentation for desktop applications
        toolbox-technical-manuals/  # Documentation for technical manuals
        web-applications/           # Documentation for web applications
    docx_converter/                 # DOCX to MDX converter
    node_modules/                   # Installed dependencies
    scripts/                        # Custom scripts
        counters.js                 # Script for handling counters in the documentation
        generateEventTreeTOC.js     # Script for generating a custom table of context for the RMC Typical Event Tree Database
        generateReportIdMap.js      # Script for generating a report ID map for code automation
        generateSidebars.js         # Script to automatically build sidebars.js for the Docusaurus project
        versions.js                 # Script to aid in version control
    src/                            # Source code for custom components and pages
        components/                 # Custom React components
        contexts/                   # Context files
        css/                        # Custom CSS files
        pages/                      # Custom pages
        theme/                      # Custom theme files
        draftDocs.js                # Aggregates all document entries marked as draft
        reportIdMap.js              # Report ID file automatically built and updated by the generateReportIdMap.js file
    static/                         # Static files like images, fonts, etc.
        bibliographies/             # Bibliographies for citation and reference management
        counters/                   # Static files related to counters
        figures/                    # Figures for the documentation
        fonts/                      # Custom fonts
        img/                        # Images for the website
        versions/                   # JSON files for version control
    .gitattributes
    .gitignore                      # Git ignore file for the project
    .nojekyll
    docusaurus.config.js            # Main configuration file for Docusaurus
    LICENSE                         # License file
    package-lock.json               # Lock file for npm dependencies
    package.json                    # Project metadata and dependencies
    postcss.config.js               # Configuration for PostCSS
    README.md                       # This file
    sidebars.js                     # Sidebar configuration for navigation
    tailwind.config.js              # Configuration for Tailwind CSS
```

Use the sidebar to explore the differen project folders and files in detail.
