docs/00-documentation-guide/07-src-folder.mdx, before:

---
title: Src Folder
---

# Src Folder

The `src/` folder contains all source code for custom React components, styles, pages, and theme files used in the RMC Software Documentation project.

---

## Components

Contains all custom React components used throughout the documentation site.  
Examples include:

- `Bibliography.js`
- `Citation.js`
- `CitationFootnote.js`
- `DocumentMetadata.js`
- `Equation.js`
- `Figure.js`
- `NavContainer.js`
- `TableAcronyms.js`
- ...and more

Additional details for React components can be found in the [React Components](./12-react-components.mdx) section of this guide.

:::danger

Do not create, modify, or delete any components in this folder. Contact a site administrator if you need to create or modify a component.

:::

---

## Contexts

Contains React context files for state management and sharing data (such as `ReportIdContext.js`).

---

## CSS

Custom CSS files for styling the documentation site and components.

- `custom.css`: Contains global styles for the entire site.
- Other CSS files are specific to individual React components, allowing for modular styling.

:::danger

Do not create, modify, or delete the styling for the website or React components. Contact a site administrator to request changes.

:::

---

## Data

This folder holds a JSON file generated during the site build process for the RMC Typical Event Tree Database document.

## Pages

Custom web pages such as the website home page, hubs, sub-hubs, and index pages.

These pages serve as entry points for different sections of the documentation site.

- `index.js`: The home page for the RMC Software Documentation website.
- Other pages correspond to specific hubs or sub-hubs, providing navigation and content organization.

:::info

These pages will continue to grow, and new pages will be added, as the site expands.

:::

---

## Theme

Custom theme-related files for Docusaurus, allowing you to override or extend the default theme.

Two themes have been overridden to provide custom functionality:

- DocItem: This theme is used to apply a 'DRAFT' watermark to documentation pages marked as draft.
- SearchBar: This theme is used to apply a custom search bar component that integrates with Algolia search.

---

## draftDocs.js

Aggregates all document entries from each navigation/category file and exports an array (`draftDocs`) containing the base paths of all documents marked as `draft: true`.

Used by DocItem theme component to determine if a documentation page should display a DRAFT watermark.

---

## reportIdMap.js

This auto-generated file exports a mapping of documentation base paths (including version) to unique report IDs.

:::danger

Do not edit this file manually; it is regenerated as needed by scripts.

:::

---

For more details on available React components and their usage, see the [React Components](./12-react-components.mdx) section of the Documentation Guide.

Commit message:

Updates to documentation guide, tailwind.config.js, README, and created TableVerticalLeftAlignNoRef component for the Documentation Guide

docs/00-documentation-guide/07-src-folder.mdx, after:

---
title: Src Folder
---

# Src Folder

The `src/` folder contains all source code for custom React components, styles, pages, and theme files used in the RMC Software Documentation project.

---

## Components

Contains all custom React components used throughout the documentation site.  
Examples include:

- `Bibliography.js`
- `Citation.js`
- `CitationFootnote.js`
- `DocumentMetadata.js`
- `Equation.js`
- `Figure.js`
- `NavContainer.js`
- `TableAcronyms.js`
- ...and more

Additional details for React components can be found in the [React Components](./12-react-components.mdx) section of this guide.

:::danger

Do not create, modify, or delete any components in this folder. Contact a site administrator if you need to create or modify a component.

:::

---

## Contexts

Contains React context files for state management and sharing data (such as `ReportIdContext.js`).

---

## CSS

The RMC Software Documentation site primarily uses [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) for styling. Styling for individual pages and
React components is specified using inline utility classes.

:::tip
This [Tailwind CSS Cheat Sheet](https://nerdcave.com/tailwind-cheat-sheet) provides useful mapping between Vanilla CSS classes and their Tailwind
CSS counter-utility classes
:::

There are some instances where global CSS files are more efficient, such as styles that are applied sitewide or affect multiple components.
This folder houses those global style sheets.

- `custom.css`: Contains global styles for the entire site.
- `equation.css`: Contains global styles for equations.
- `tables.css`: Contains global styles for tables.

:::danger

Do not create, modify, or delete the styling for the website or React components. Contact a site administrator to request changes.

:::

---

## Data

This folder holds a JSON file generated during the site build process for the RMC Typical Event Tree Database document.

## Pages

Custom web pages such as the website home page, hubs, sub-hubs, and index pages.

These pages serve as entry points for different sections of the documentation site.

- `index.js`: The home page for the RMC Software Documentation website.
- Other pages correspond to specific hubs or sub-hubs, providing navigation and content organization.

:::info

These pages will continue to grow, and new pages will be added, as the site expands.

:::

---

## Theme

Custom theme-related files for Docusaurus, allowing you to override or extend the default theme.

Two themes have been overridden to provide custom functionality:

- DocItem: This theme is used to apply a 'DRAFT' watermark to documentation pages marked as draft.
- SearchBar: This theme is used to apply a custom search bar component that integrates with Algolia search.

---

## draftDocs.js

Aggregates all document entries from each navigation/category file and exports an array (`draftDocs`) containing the base paths of all documents marked as `draft: true`.

Used by DocItem theme component to determine if a documentation page should display a DRAFT watermark.

---

## reportIdMap.js

This auto-generated file exports a mapping of documentation base paths (including version) to unique report IDs.

:::danger

Do not edit this file manually; it is regenerated as needed by scripts.

:::

---

For more details on available React components and their usage, see the [React Components](./12-react-components.mdx) section of the Documentation Guide.
